It’s a simple fact
that to be at peace with others,
we must be willing to forgive.
Please notice two examples:
A father and his teenage daughter
didn’t get along.
Minor disagreements often developed
into shouting matches.
Finally, the tension got so bad
that the daughter was asked
to leave the house.
Eventually, she recognized
that she was at fault
and asked for her father’s forgiveness.
But instead of overlooking her mistakes,
her father rejected her efforts.
He was unwilling to extend forgiveness
to his own daughter.
Now, let’s contrast that
with another example.
A blameless man was condemned to die
for a crime he didn’t commit.
Shortly before he died,
the innocent man stated:
“Father, forgive them,
for they do not know what they are doing.”
Those words of Jesus
are recorded at Luke 23:34,
and he may have been referring
to the Roman soldiers
who drove the nails into his hands and feet
and who didn’t know who he really was.
Or Jesus may have had in mind
some in the crowd
who demanded his execution
but would later exercise faith in him.
The point is that Jesus
was willing to forgive freely.
How do we measure up
with regard to forgiveness?
Are we like Jesus,
willing to forgive others freely?
Or at times, do we tend to be more
like the man who was unwilling to forgive?
Granting forgiveness isn’t always easy.
Imperfection exerts
a powerful influence over us,
sometimes robbing us of compassion.
When someone hurts us,
we may become resentful, or hold a grudge.
And perhaps some of us
were taught not to forgive others.
Little wonder that cultivating
a peaceful, forgiving spirit
can be difficult.
Still, the Bible encourages us
to forgive freely.
Let’s consider another example
of forgiveness in the man Job.
Now, we’re familiar with his trials:
loss of his possessions and ten children,
a loathsome disease,
and his wife told him to curse God and die.
Three companions heard
about Job’s calamities,
and they agreed to go comfort him.
Job 2:13 states that when they arrived,
“they sat . . . with him
for seven days and seven nights,”
but they didn’t say “a word to him.”
Now, maybe that was a good thing
because when they finally opened
their mouths,
they deeply hurt Job
with their baseless accusations.
But notice something interesting
about this account.
Please turn with me to Job chapter 42.
At the end of Job’s trials, Jehovah asked Job
to do something
regarding these false accusers.
Notice Jehovah’s words there at Job 42,
the B  portion of verse 8:
“And my servant Job will pray for you.
“I will surely accept his request
not to deal with you
according to your foolishness.”
Did you notice
that after all the false accusations,
Jehovah asked Job to pray
for the men who had tormented him?
Now, would Job tell Jehovah,
“Jehovah, after what they said to me,
I’m not going to forgive them”?
Would Job be resentful?
Notice the latter portion of verse 9:
“And Jehovah accepted Job’s prayer.”
Job followed Jehovah’s instructions.
What was the result
of Job’s integrity and his forgiving spirit?
Verse 10:
“After Job had prayed for his companions,
“Jehovah removed Job’s tribulation
and restored his prosperity.
Jehovah gave him double what he had before.”
The account goes on to say
that Job had ten more children.
He lived for 140 more years,
and verse 17 states:
“Finally Job died,
after a long and satisfying life.”
Job was blessed for his forgiving spirit,
and he set a good example for us
to forgive freely.
In the following dramatization
with Celia and Haley,
notice why Haley finally decides
to forgive freely.
Hey, it’s me.
I’ve been thinking of you.
Great broadcast.
How did you like the new original song?
Give us a call.
I wish she’d give it a rest.
Sorry?
Oh, nothing.
Sorry, it’s just Emily
for the millionth time.
What’s the problem, love?
There’s no problem.
It’s just . . .
. . . difficult to let her back in?
Not that simple?
Not that simple.
You want to forgive . . .
. . . but not get burned again.
Keep in mind
that a chance to forgive
is a chance to imitate Jehovah.
We wouldn’t want to miss that opportunity.
I never thought about it like that.
Think back to a time
when you wanted forgiveness
—when it meant everything.
How did it feel?
. . . just like your Nana does as well.
She really deeply cares about you.
You feel awful
that you’ve let everyone down.
You’re very precious.
Thank you.
Then they forgive you,
and suddenly everything is OK.
Emily, sorry I haven’t been back to you.
Have plans for tomorrow?
What good reasoning on the part of Celia!
Did you notice the expression
that really touched Haley’s heart?
“A chance to forgive
is a chance to imitate Jehovah.
We wouldn’t want to miss that opportunity.”
So when we’ve been wronged,
we don’t want to miss the opportunity
to imitate Jehovah by forgiving freely.
Please notice how this is highlighted
at Colossians 3:13.
When we considered Job’s example,
remember that Jehovah
instructed him to pray for his companions.
And that helped Job
display a forgiving spirit.
Well, notice here what Jehovah
instructs us to do at Colossians 3:13:
“Continue putting up with one another
“and forgiving one another freely
“even if anyone has a cause for complaint
against another.
“Just as Jehovah freely forgave you,
you must also do the same.”
The Greek verb used here for “freely forgive”
is related to a word often rendered
“undeserved kindness” or “favor.”
When used in the sense of forgiving,
this verb conveys the idea of doing so
freely, generously
—just as when you, out of generosity,
give a gift to someone.
Jehovah requires that we
freely forgive others in imitation of him.
Did you notice the end of the verse?
“You must  also do the same.”
Now, if the offense is minor,
it’s best to overlook it.
First Corinthians 13:5 states
that love “does not keep account
of the injury.”
And Proverbs 19:11 tells us
that “it is beauty . . .
to overlook an offense.”
However, if we feel that we need to talk
to our brother or sister
about an offense that was committed
against us,
what’s the best way to handle that?
First, we should ask Jehovah in prayer
for his guidance.
Then with the brother’s good qualities
in mind,
graciously tell him
that we want to make peace.
Listen carefully and empathetically.
We shouldn’t interrupt, even if we
don’t agree with everything being said.
It may be that his viewpoint is wrong,
but it is his viewpoint.
Then when it’s our turn to speak,
we want to be gracious.
Tell the brother
what we appreciate about him;
apologize for any part that we played
in the misunderstanding.
If our humble efforts result in good,
thank Jehovah.
If they don’t,
keep asking Jehovah for guidance
while we look for another opportunity
to make peace.
When we truly forgive,
we make a heartfelt decision
to let go of resentment.
And what peace that can bring us!
Now, forgiving doesn’t mean
that we approve of a wrong action,
consider it unimportant,
or pretend it didn’t happen.
Also, if we’ve been treated unjustly
and have a cause for complaint,
we do what we can to pursue peace
and resolve the matter.
And then we confidently leave it
in Jehovah’s hands.
Brothers and sisters, what will you
take away from this consideration?
I’m sure you’ll agree that it can be
a challenge at times to forgive.
But rather than be like the man
we spoke of earlier
who refused to forgive his own daughter,
may we follow the examples of Jehovah,
Jesus, Job, and Haley
by forgiving freely, generously.
Remember, a chance to forgive
is a chance to imitate Jehovah,
and we wouldn’t want to miss
that opportunity.
May all of us pursue peace
by being willing to forgive freely.
Brother Gerrit Lösch,
a member of the Governing Body,
will now present the final talk
of this symposium,
“‘Seek Peace and Pursue It’ . . .
By Using Our Gift of Speech Wisely.”